Data from: Phylogenetic relationships, breeding implications, and cultivation history of Hawaiian taro (Colocasia
esculenta) through genome-wide SNP genotyping

https://datadryad.org/stash/dataset/doi:10.5061/dryad.r35kr

Helmkampf, Martin, Humanities Iowa 
Wolfgruber, Thomas K., Humanities Iowa 
Bellinger, M. Renee, Humanities Iowa 
Paudel, Roshan, Humanities Iowa 
Kantar, Michael B., Humanities Iowa 
Miyasaka, Susan C., Humanities Iowa 
Kimball, Heather, Humanities Iowa 
Brown, Ashley, Quidel Corporation (United States) 
Veillet, Anne, Humanities Iowa 
Read, Andrew, Cornell University 
Shintaku, Michael, Humanities Iowa 
Published Aug 08, 2017 on Dryad. https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.r35kr 

Cite this dataset

Submit 

Helmkampf, Martin et al. (2017). Data from: Phylogenetic relationships, breeding implications, and cultivation
history of Hawaiian taro (Colocasia esculenta) through genome-wide SNP genotyping [Dataset]. Dryad.
https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.r35kr

Abstract

Taro, Colocasia esculenta, is one of the world’s oldest root crops and of particular economic and cultural
significance in Hawai‘i, where historically more than 150 different landraces were grown. We developed a
genome-wide set of more than 2400 high-quality single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers from 70 taro
accessions of Hawaiian, South Pacific, Palauan, and mainland Asian origins, with several objectives: (a) uncover
the phylogenetic relationships between Hawaiian and other Pacific landraces, (b) shed light on the history of taro
cultivation in Hawai‘i, and (c) develop a tool to discriminate among Hawaiian and other taros. We found that
almost all existing Hawaiian landraces fall into five monophyletic groups that are largely consistent with the
traditional Hawaiian classification based on morphological characters, e.g., leaf shape and petiole color. Genetic
diversity was low within these clades but considerably higher between them. Population structure analyses further
indicated that the diversification of taro in Hawai‘i most likely occurred by a combination of frequent somatic
mutation and occasional hybridization. Unexpectedly, the South Pacific accessions were found nested within the
clades mainly composed of Hawaiian accessions, rather than paraphyletic to them. This suggests that the origin of
clades identified here preceded the colonization of Hawai‘i, and that early Polynesian settlers brought taro
landraces from different clades with them. In the absence of a sequenced genome, this marker set provides a
valuable resource towards obtaining a genetic linkage map, and to study the genetic basis of phenotypic traits of
interest to taro breeding such as disease resistance. 

Usage notes

HawaiianTaro_SNP.vcf

Zip archive of eight SNP datasets in VCF format, obtained by four SNP calling methods: GBS+RAD, GBS subset,
transcriptome, and UNEAK (see Materials and methods). Each was filtered by minor allele count ≥ 2 (mac2) and minor
allele frequency ≥ 0.1 (maf10). The primary dataset was based on GBS+RAD and mac2.

HawaiianTaro_SNP.fas

ZIP archive of two SNP datasets used for phylogenetic analyses in FASTA format, homozygous positions only
(nomenclature see VCF files).

Funding

National Science Foundation, Award: 1345247 

Location

Pacific

Data files


Download dataset 

 
Aug 08, 2017 

* HawaiianTar...NP.fas.zip 
 68.48 KB
* HawaiianTar...NP.vcf.zip 
 2.49 MB
